# Part 3: Election Violence Prediction from News

Part 3 builds a binary classification model that uses news from time T to predict the level of election violence above a threshold x at time T+1. There are two data sources for this model: 1) the news data comes from the curated news dataset from Part 2, which are used as the features; and 2) data of election violence is from DECO, from which the target variable is derived. Both datasets are aggregated by day to create a single dataset of both sources. The embeddings of news articles each day are averaged together to create a mean representation of that day’s news content determined as relevant to the top risk factors of election violence in Part 2. DECO election-related fatalities are aggregated on a daily basis. 

In search of the best model, Part 3 experiments with the value of T, the prediction time frame, and x, the threshold of fatalities. The value of T adjusts the number of days the input data are aggregated together as well as the number of days output prediction of fatalities encapsulates. In other words if T = 1, the model uses a single day’s worth of news to predict the level of election-related fatalities one day in advance. If T = 2, the model uses two days worth of news to predict the level of election-related fatalities for the next two days. Similar aggregations of 3-6 days were also explored. The value of x defines a fatality threshold. Part 3 tested models with threshold values between 0-6. 

Once the level of aggregation T and fatality threshold x are defined, the target label (i.e., level of fatality which comes from DECO) was shifted one row up. This makes the binary classifier predictive since the average news representation for each unit of aggregation now corresponds to the level of fatality in the following period. Then, the first 80% of this transformed dataset was used for training, which includes the initial run of the August 2017 national election. The last 20% of data was used as an out-of-sample test set and encapsulates election-related violence during the rerun of the national election in October 2017. 

Two classification algorithms that enable classification of non-linear relationships were examined. RF, which is highly cited in conflict prediction literature as outperforming linear algorithms and more advanced neural networks (Muchlinski et al., 2016; Ettensperger, 2020), and Support Vector Classifier (SVC) were tested in this model of social violence, which tends to be highly non-linear (Kupilik & Witmer, 2018; Musumba et al., 2021). Finally, the best model was determined using a search across several hyperparameters for both algorithms. 
